Hi and welcome back.
In this video, we're looking at relative imports.
Relative imports seem to be more trouble
than it's worth in Python
because a lot of people don't know how they work.
It's not something that's talked about all that often,
and there's a few things you have to know about Python
in order to make use of relative imports successfully.
Generally though, I'll say relative imports
are probably not worth doing
because of their limitations.
Let's talk about them.
In the last video, we looked at the file operations
file that we've got here with two functions:
save to file and read file.
And in our app dot py when we wanted to import it,
we did from utils dot that opens up this package utils.
File operations, that opens up the file operations file.
Import these two functions.
When we import a file like we say do this,
Python goes to the file and navigates to it
and it runs it
and then it gives us access to the functions
that were defined in it.
So if we have print--
Oh, whoa, whoa.
If we have print hello inside file operations,
and then we go back to app and we run app dot py,
notice how we get hello printed out.
Because, again, when you import the file,
this goes to this file and runs it.
It defines the functions, it doesn't run the functions.
It defines the functions, it runs any code that's in there,
and then at the end, it goes back and it gives you access
to those things that you imported.
What Python is doing in the background
is essentially constructing a dictionary
of name of function to the function contents
and that's really what it's giving you back
and then you can use them as functions there.
So, the file runs when you import it.
That's something that's important to know.
So what we've done up here is an absolute import.
We've started at the top of our project
inside the imports project folder.
That's the utils package.
That's at the very top.
We've accessed that.
Then we've accessed the file operations
and that's called an absolute import
because we've defined the absolute path of imports.
If we had inside utils a new package,
called for example common,
this is a pretty common package name,
and we move file operations into there.
Remember to uncheck search for references.
Now we get this unknown file.
It cannot resolve it.
So what we have to do is
utils dot common dot file operations.
We're accessing the utils package
and the common package inside of that,
and then the file operations file inside of that.
And then we can import from it.
This, again, is an absolute import.
Notice how we start at the level of app dot py
in every instance, but that's a side effect.
The important thing is that we start
at the top of our project.
Okay.
So what if we had something like this?
Let's create a new file inside utils, a new Python file.
Notice inside utils, not inside common.
And we'll call this find dot py.
And in this file, I'm gonna put a function
that will find a particular element inside a list.
So let's say, find in is gonna take in an iterable,
it's gonna take in a finder function,
and it's gonna take an expected value,
and then it's just going to say, for i in iterable.
If finder i equal equal expected.
Oh finder.
All right.
Return i.
Otherwise, we're gonna raise a not found error
and say expected not found in provided iterable.
Of course, we have to create such an error,
and you know how to do that.
Create this not found error inside this class.
I'm sure you managed all to do
is say class not found error extends from exception
and doesn't do anything
since we don't have any extra arguments
other than the message there.
Now we've got this find function here.
And, again, if we go to app dot py,
we can import it
and you'd know how to import it as well
from utils dot find import find in.
And then this allows us to find in a particular list.
If we are in find dot py,
and we wanted to get access to the file operations
for some reason like, this is just an example,
then there are two ways of doing it.
There are three ways that people normally try.
Two ways which are correct and one way which is wrong.
And this is the wrong way.
This is the wrong way of doing it, okay?
So do not do this.
You'd think that because we are currently in find dot py,
which is inside utils, we'd just be able to say
from common dot file operations import save to file.
And this makes sense in the majority of languages,
but really what's happening here is
that Python thinks that we are doing an absolute import,
because we've not told it otherwise,
and therefore, we have to start at the top of our project.
So the only correct way of doing this is
utils dot common dot file operations and it likes that.
Another option is to tell Python
that we want to start from the current folder,
the utils folder.
Then, we can do that by removing the utils,
but keeping the dot.
And what this now means is reasonably inconsistent
with the rest of the usage of dots in Python,
but it means inside the current folder.
So in the current folder, common in common file operations
and this is now a relative import.
A relative import is an import
that starts from the current file
or the current file that we're working with
and it can go down to another package there.
So all this is good, but there are a few problems.
Here's the first problem.
Let's run find dot py.
Not so good.
We get a module not found error when we run find dot py.
Okay.
We will talk about this in just a moment.
I want to--
I wanted to show you why this is not such a good idea
in the majority of cases.
If you run app dot py, it all works.
Notice how app dot py is importing find
and that is running find which means
that this code here is running, too.
And it's working when we do that.
It's working when we run app dot py.
It's not working when we run find dot py.
And that is that thing I was talking about earlier
about running a file as a script versus as a module.
There's just a couple of differences in there.
So, let's talk about exactly why this doesn't work
when we run find dot py
and why it works when we run app dot py.
And to do that, we have to talk
about the dunder name variable.
So I'm going to remove the actual code that we're using for,
we don't really care about it anymore.
But what I'm gonna do is print underscore underscore name
underscore underscore.
I'm gonna print underscore underscore
name underscore underscore for app dot py.
Do you know the value that this is going to have?
I don't expect you to, but the value is
underscore underscore main underscore underscore.
So there's a dunder main name.
Whenever you run a file as a script,
that is whenever you run anything,
like app dot py or find dot py or file operations dot py,
then underscore underscore name underscore underscore
of that file is always going to be
underscore underscore main underscore underscore.
So the main is always the name the file you've ran.
So that's an important thing.
Let's go over to find dot py then, and print it's name.
What do you think this is going to be
when we run our dot py?
We're gonna run our dot py.
What do you think we're gonna see printed out?
I hope you thought about it, or maybe even ran the code
so I can show you exactly what's going on.
First of all, we get utils dot find
because I said that when you import, you run the file.
So this file operations file runs first
and then utils dot find runs second.
Then we print out this name here.
So utils dot find runs first here
and we print the name at the very bottom.
And the name now is utils dot find.
And that's because that's what we imported, utils dot find.
So Python goes over here, finds the file, and now decides
that now this file will be called utils dot find.
Then we print underscore underscore name
underscore underscore and this is still main
because we ran this file.
Let's go over to find dot py
and now I'm going to go back to the thing that works,
utils dot common dot file operations
and we're to run find dot py.
Notice how we get main
because we ran find dot py
and the name of it is always main,
as it's the file we've ran.
Then, if we revert back to running app,
and by the way, I've removed the utils there,
and we go to common file operations
and we print the name here too.
Let's go back to running app and see what happens.
Okay, nothing terribly unexpected.
We get main for the app,
we get utils dot find for find,
and somehow we get utils dot common dot file operations
for file operations even though
it was imported like so, here.
Of course, we did also import it up here
so this is the name it's got.
Let's remove this import and run app again.
Notice how utils dot common dot file operations
is still the first file.
When we do--
Well, sorry.
Let me explain that.
I was jumping right into something else there.
When we import from utils dot find,
this is the first thing that happens.
We go into find and then we import file operations.
So this file operations file is the first one
to run to completion.
We print out the name,
which is utils common file operations.
Then we go back to find, after the import,
and we run through this
and we end up printing out the name, utils dot find.
And finally we go back to here and we print the app's name.
That's main.
As you can see, the file operations name
is not dot common dot file operations.
It is utils dot common dot file operations
because this full stop here
means access the current package in the name.
So that's utils.
The name of the file is utils dot find.
When you do a dot at the start,
it says get the package utils
and access the common package inside of it
and the file operations package inside of it.
So the end name ends up as
utils dot common dot file operations.
Now, why does it not work when we run find dot py?
Again, I'm going to import from here.
Why does it not work with a relative import
when we run find dot py?
Well, because the dot is main and main isn't utils.
So then it tries to access underscore underscore main
underscore underscore dot common dot file operations
and that's not gonna work because main is not a package.
And this is why relative imports can be a bit of a pain.
And indeed, if we run this again,
you'll see that we get a no module name main dot common
because that's exactly what it's trying to do.
It's trying to access the package of this name
and just appending it to whatever it is here.
Okay.
So of course if find was in another folder,
this package could be my project dot utils
dot common dot file operations.
This would be the find package
and it would all get appended to the start.
So whatever it is that find is in
is going to get appended at the front
and then it's going to add this at the back.
Those two together are going to be
the absolute path of file operations.
Of course, if you run find as a script,
you add main here, which is not valid,
because that's not a valid package.
But this works if you run app dot py.
And it works because you've now sent
that find file is inside utils.
So when you go into find, the name is utils dot find
so what gets appended here is utils.
This is what's happening in the background.
So this works when you don't run the file as a script.
Doesn't work when you do run it as a script.
So that's it for relative imports
where we're importing children.
Remember the common package here is a child
of the user's package where we're currently at.
In the next video, let's look at parent imports.
How the file operations module can import,
for example, this not found error.
Let's go there.
So I'll see you in just a moment.